>> Reporter: TUCKED BETWEEN OIL
FIELDS IN CENTRAL CALIFORNIA'S
KERN VALLEY IS THE TAFT
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION.
CRAIG APKER HAS BEEN THE WARDEN
FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS.
>> I SIMPLY WANT TO RUN AND BE
PART OF THE BEST PRISON EVER.
>> Reporter: TAFT IS A LOW-
SECURITY PRISON THAT HAS DORM-
STYLE HOUSING, A MEDICAL UNIT,
AND OFFERS PRISONERS HIGH SCHOOL
EQUIVALENCY CLASSES AND WORK-
TRAINING PROGRAMS.
WARDEN APKER ASKED US NOT TO
RECORD VIDEO FOR SECURITY
REASONS, BUT HE ALLOWED US TO
TAKE THESE PHOTOS-- LATER
REVIEWED AND CLEARED BY A PRISON
OFFICIAL.
>> IT REALLY COMES DOWN TO HOW
WE OPERATE OUR INSTITUTIONS.
DO WE HAVE MEANINGFUL PROGRAMS?
DO WE HAVE A RESPECTFUL
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE INMATES?
>> Reporter: ON THE SURFACE,
TAFT LOOKS A LOT LIKE THE MORE
THAN 100 FACILITIES OVERSEEN BY
THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF PRISONS.
BUT THIS ONE IS OPERATED BY A
PRIVATE, FOR-PROFIT COMPANY:
MANAGEMENT AND TRAINING
CORPORATION, OR M.T.C.
AS WITH ALL PRIVATELY-RUN
FEDERAL PRISONS, TAFT HAS TWO
BUREAU OF PRISON MONITORS ON
SITE TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH
FEDERAL GUIDELINES.
BEFORE STARTING HIS JOB WITH
M.T.C., APKER WORKED 28 YEARS
FOR THE B.O.P., INCLUDING TEN AS
A WARDEN.
>> I DIDN'T JUST CHANGE HOW I
VIEW MY RESPONSIBILITIES, MY
BELIEF IN WHAT WE DO HERE,
BECAUSE I'M IN THE PRIVATE
SECTOR.
I BROUGHT WITH ME THE SAME NEED
TO TRY... TRY TO ACHIEVE
EXCELLENCE.
>> Reporter: TAFT IS ONE OF THE
11 LOW-SECURITY FEDERAL PRISONS
RUN BY M.T.C. OR TWO LARGER
PRIVATE PRISON COMPANIES,
CORECIVIC AND THE GEO GROUP.
SAVING MONEY WAS ONE REASON THE
GOVERNMENT INITIALLY TURNED TO
PRIVATE PRISONS.
THE BUREAU OF PRISONS SAYS THEY
COST ON AVERAGE $17 A DAY LESS
PER PRISONER TO OPERATE,
SUGGESTING THOSE 11 FACILITIES
SAVE TAXPAYERS $144 MILLION A
YEAR.
A 2016 STUDY BY THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION FOUND THOSE SAVINGS
ARE ACHIEVED PRIMARILY BY HIRING
FEWER CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS AND
PAYING THEM LESS.
ANOTHER REASON FOR TURNING TO
PRIVATE PRISONS WAS
OVERCROWDING.
BETWEEN 1980 AND 2013, WITH THE
ADVENT OF HARSHER SENTENCING
LAWS LIKE MANDATORY MINIMUMS FOR
DRUG CRIMES, THE FEDERAL PRISON
POPULATION INCREASED EIGHT-FOLD.
A BIG PART OF THAT INCREASE WAS
A MASSIVE SPIKE IN PROSECUTIONS
OF IMMIGRANTS ACCUSED OF COMING
BACK TO THE U.S. AFTER
DEPORTATION, OR "ILLEGAL
REENTRY."
THE B.O.P. RELIES ON THOSE 11
PRIVATE PRISONS, LIKE TAFT, TO
HOUSE NON-CITIZEN OFFENDERS.
AT TWO OF THOSE PRISONS, IN
TEXAS AND IN MISSISSIPPI, THERE
WERE RIOTS IN 2009 AND 2012
FOLLOWING THE DEATHS OF SEVERAL
INMATES IN CUSTODY.
THE INCIDENTS SPARKED
INVESTIGATIONS BY THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S INSPECTOR GENERAL,
MICHAEL HOROWITZ.
>> IN ONE OF THOSE RIOTS, A... A
CORRECTIONAL OFFICER WAS KILLED.
MANY OTHER INMATES AND
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS WERE
INJURED.
SEVERAL OF THESE RIOTS HAD
FOLLOWED COMPLAINTS BY INMATES
ABOUT STAFFING, CORRECTIONAL
STAFFING, HEALTHCARE STAFFING;
CONCERNS ABOUT THE PROVISION OF
FOOD AND OTHER SERVICES.
THE B.O.P. HAD NOT HELD THE
PRISONS ACCOUNTABLE AND MADE
SURE THAT THEY HAD IN FACT TAKEN
THE ACTIONS THAT THEY NEEDED TO
TAKE.
>> Reporter: THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL'S FINDINGS AFTER THE
RIOTS LED TO A BROADER FOUR-
YEAR INVESTIGATION THAT COMPARED
FEDERAL PRIVATELY-RUN PRISONS
TO SIMILAR GOVERNMENT-RUN
FACILITIES.
THE REPORT REVEALED THAT, PER
CAPITA, PRIVATELY-RUN FACILITIES
HAD MORE CONTRABAND SMUGGLED IN;
MORE LOCKDOWNS AND USES OF FORCE
BY CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS; MORE
ASSAULTS BOTH BY INMATES ON
OTHER INMATES AND BY INMATES ON
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS; MORE
COMPLAINTS ABOUT MEDICAL CARE,
STAFF, FOOD, AND CONDITIONS OF
CONFINEMENT; AND TWO FACILITIES
WERE HOUSING INMATES IN SOLITARY
CONFINEMENT TO FREE UP BED
SPACE.
THE FINDINGS ALSO HIGHLIGHTED
CHRONIC UNDERSTAFFING AS THE
ROOT OF MANY PROBLEMS.
>> IT GOES RIGHT TO THE CORE OF
MAKING SURE THAT THERE ARE
ENOUGH CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS TO
WATCH OVER THE INMATES; TO MAKE
SURE THAT... THAT ALL INMATES
ARE MAINTAINED IN A SECURE AND
SAFE ENVIRONMENT; AND THAT
CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS, VERY
CRITICALLY, ARE SAFE FROM THE
INMATES.
>> Reporter: HOROWITZ ALSO
FAULTED THE B.O.P. ITSELF FOR
FAILING TO HOLD THE COMPANIES
ACCOUNTABLE TO THEIR CONTRACT
REQUIREMENTS, CONTRACTS WORTH
MORE THAN $500 MILLION EACH
YEAR.
SO, HOW ARE THESE THINGS FALLING
THROUGH THE CRACKS?
>> BECAUSE THERE ISN'T EFFECTIVE
OVERSIGHT GOING ON.
THE RESPONSIBILITY PRIMARILY
FALLS ON THE B.O.P. WITH
CONNECTION WITH THEIR CONTRACTS,
AND THESE ARE SUBSTANTIAL
CONTRACTS.
>> Reporter: THE BUREAU OF
PRISONS AGREED TO IMPLEMENT HIS
RECOMMENDED REFORMS, BUT THE
COMPANIES DISPUTED THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL'S FINDINGS, TELLING
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND WHAT THEY TOLD
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT-- THAT
THE INVESTIGATION DIDN'T ACCOUNT
FOR HOW THEIR LARGELY NON-
CITIZEN INMATE POPULATIONS ARE
MORE DIFFICULT TO MANAGE.
ONE POSITIVE NOTE FOR PRIVATE
PRISONS: THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
DID FIND THEIR INMATES PASSED
MORE DRUG TESTS AND FACED FEWER
ACCUSATIONS OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
THAN INMATES IN GOVERNMENT-RUN
INSTITUTIONS.
LAST AUGUST, PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DECIDED ALL
B.O.P. CONTRACTS WITH PRIVATE
COMPANIES WOULD BE PHASED OUT.
>> I WAS DISAPPOINTED.
I... I THINK THE CRITICS TEND TO
VIEW A PRIVATE CORRECTIONS
COMPANY AS BEING BOTTOM LINE-
DRIVEN TO THE EXTENT THAT
SHORTCUTS, IN AN EFFORT TO SAVE
MONEY, LOWER QUALITY.
BUT I HAVE NEVER BEEN ASKED TO
TAKE A SHORTCUT TO ADDRESS ANY
BOTTOM-LINE CONCERNS HERE AT
TAFT.
NEVER.
>> I KNOW THAT YOU WANT SAFE
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE THE STREETS
BELONG TO FAMILIES AND
COMMUNITIES.
>> Reporter: THIS YEAR, THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION REVERSED
THE DECISION TO PHASE OUT THE
BUREAU OF PRISONS' PRIVATE
CONTRACTS.
STOCK PRICES FOR CORECIVIC AND
THE GEO GROUP, WHICH HAD
PLUMMETED AFTER THE OBAMA
DIRECTIVE, HAVE SOARED SINCE
ELECTION DAY.
>> FOR THE PRIVATE PRISON
INDUSTRY, THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IS AN ENORMOUS
GIFT.
>> Reporter: CARL TAKEI HEADS
THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION'S PRISON PROJECT.
>> ALL OF THE EXPANSION OF
IMMIGRATION DETENTION, THE
REVIVAL OF THE WAR ON DRUGS, THE
INCREASED CRIMINAL PROSECUTION
OF IMMIGRANTS, AND THE LONGER
SENTENCES FOR IMMIGRATION
PROSECUTIONS, ALL ADD UP TO AN
ENORMOUS BOONDOGGLE FOR THE
PRIVATE PRISON INDUSTRY.
>> Reporter: IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT ALREADY
HOUSES MORE THAN 70% OF ITS
DETAINEES IN PRIVATELY-RUN
FACILITIES, AND PRESIDENT TRUMP
SUPPORTS A NEW MANDATORY MINIMUM
SENTENCE OF FIVE YEARS FOR
ILLEGAL REENTRY.
TAKEI IS CONCERNED THE COMPANIES
HAVE A PROFIT INCENTIVE TO KEEP
PRISONERS IN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM LONGER.
>> YOU COULD END UP IN A
CIRCUMSTANCE WHERE YOU GET
ARRESTED, HELD IN A GEO GROUP
JAIL, SERVE YOUR SENTENCE IN A
GEO GROUP PRISON, GET RELEASED
TO A GEO GROUP HALFWAY HOUSE,
AND THEN END UP SUPERVISED ON A
GEO GROUP G.P.S. MONITOR.
AND THIS IS EXTRAORDINARILY
DANGEROUS BECAUSE IT ALLOWS THE
PRIVATE PRISON COMPANIES TO
MANIPULATE THE DEMAND FOR THEIR
OWN PRODUCTS.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF PRISONS INCARCERATES
ABOUT 20,000 INDIVIDUALS IN
PRIVATE FACILITIES, STATE AND
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS HOUSE MORE
THAN FOUR TIMES THAT AMOUNT,
WITH OVER 90,000 PEOPLE IN
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS.
TEXAS IS AMONG THE TOP STATES
USING PRIVATE PRISONS.
THE INDUSTRY'S CONTRACTS HERE IN
THE STATE ARE WORTH HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS EVERY YEAR.
TEXAS, WHICH HAS THE NATION'S
LARGEST PRISON POPULATION, BEGAN
USING PRIVATE PRISONS IN THE
1980s AND HOUSES THE HIGHEST
NUMBER OF STATE INMATES INSIDE
THEM.
HAVE YOU BEEN SATISFIED WITH
WHAT YOU'VE SEEN?
>> SO FAR, EVERYTHING'S BEEN
WORKING GOOD.
>> Reporter: SINCE JANUARY,
SHERIFF MARK JOHNSON HAS
OVERSEEN THE 96-BED FANNIN
COUNTY JAIL IN BONHAM, TEXAS.
HE SAYS HIRING THE GEO GROUP TO
RUN THE JAIL IS SAVING THE
COUNTY MONEY.
>> IT IS EXPENSIVE TO OPERATE
ONE OF THESE THINGS.
IS THERE MONEY TO BE MADE IN IT?
YEAH.
>> Reporter: THE MONEY THE
COMPANIES MAKE OFTEN INCLUDES
REIMBURSEMENTS FROM LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS FOR JAIL AND PRISON
BEDS THAT GO UNUSED, FALLING
SHORT OF OCCUPANCY QUOTAS IN THE
CONTRACTS.
WOULD YOU RECOMMEND GEO TO A
NEIGHBORING COUNTY THAT WAS
LOOKING TO DEAL WITH
OVERCROWDING?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT WOULD BE A... A
BENEFIT TO THEM.
I HAVEN'T SEEN ANYBODY HERE THAT
I WOULDN'T BE HAPPY TO HAVE ON
MY TEAM WORKING FOR ME.
YES, IT WOULD BE A HUGE CONCERN
TO THINK THAT THEY WEREN'T DOING
WHAT THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO BE
DOING AND THAT THE PRISONERS
WEREN'T BEING TREATED RIGHT,
BEING GIVEN THEIR BASIC NEEDS,
THEIR EVERYDAY NEEDS THAT ARE
REQUIRED BY LAW.
>> Reporter: A 2008 REPORT BY
THE TEXAS LEGISLATURE FOUND THAT
STAFF AT PRIVATE PRISONS WERE
GENERALLY PAID LESS THAN THEIR
STATE COUNTERPARTS AND HAD MUCH
HIGHER TURNOVER RATES.
SINCE 2011, WITH A DECLINING
PRISONER POPULATION, THE STATE
HAS CLOSED THREE PRIVATE
PRISONS, AND, TO SAVE MONEY, THE
LEGISLATURE HAS PROPOSED CLOSING
THREE MORE.
>> SHERIFF.
>> Reporter: SHERIFF JOHNSON
SAYS WHETHER HIS JAIL IS RUN BY
THE COUNTY OR A PRIVATE COMPANY,
ULTIMATELY, HE'S THE ONE
RESPONSIBLE FOR OVERSIGHT.
>> UNDER LAW, THERE'S NO GETTING
OUT OF IT.
IT SAYS THE SHERIFF IS THE
CONSERVATOR OF THE PEOPLE AND
SHALL MAINTAIN AND OPERATE A
JAIL AND TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THOSE INMATES, AND THAT... THAT
IS OUR RESPONSIBILITY.
BUT WHEN SOMETHING BAD HAPPENS
TO ONE OF THEM, THE LAWSUIT IS
GOING TO HAVE MY NAME RIGHT AT
THE TOP OF IT.